#LyX 1.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 221
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{fancyhdr}
\usepackage{charter}
\usepackage{bbm} % for symbols
\usepackage{fullpage}
\def\FileAuthor{ {\sc Batada, Shepp \& Siegmund} }
\def\FileTitle{  }
\fancyhead[L]{\small \FileTitle{}}
\fancyhead[R]{\small \FileAuthor{}}
\fancyfoot[L]{\small \today}
%\pagestyle{fancy}
%\setstretch{1.8} % table row height
% \renewcommand{\baselinestretch}{2.0} %2.0} % triplespacing
%\usepackage[nofiglist,notablist,nomarker]{endfloat}
%\usepackage{pstricks}

%\beamertemplateshadingbackground{red!5}{structure!5}
%\usepackage{beamerthemeshadow}
 %\beamertemplatetransparentcovereddynamic
%\beamertemplatetransparentcovered
\newcommand{\E}[1]{\mathbf{\mathbbm{E}}\left[#1\right]}
\newcommand{\V}[1]{\mathbf{Var}\left[#1\right]}
\newcommand{\N}{\mathcal{N}}
\newcommand{\ang}{\mathring{A}}
\renewcommand{\P}[1]{\mathbf{\mathbbm{P}}\bigl(#1\bigr)}
\usepackage{color}
\newcommand{\jabref}{ {\color{red}J}ab{\color{blue}R}ef}
\end_preamble
\language english
\inputencoding latin1
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize 11
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 1
\use_natbib 0
\use_numerical_citations 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 4
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title


\begin_inset ERT
status Collapsed

\layout Standard

\backslash 
jabref
\end_inset 

\SpecialChar ~
(1.2) User Manual 
\layout Author

Morten Alver and Nizar Batada
\layout Date

Feb 20, 2004
\layout Standard


\begin_inset LatexCommand \tableofcontents{}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

\layout Standard


\begin_inset ERT
status Collapsed

\layout Standard

\backslash 
newpage
\end_inset 


\layout Section

Revision
\layout Enumerate

Initial Draft: Nizar Batada Feb 20, 2004
\layout Section

About This Guide
\layout Standard

This manual is a brief introduction to some of the most useful features
 and functions of JabRef.
 Learning this short list of features will enable you to use the JabRef
 efficiently.
 This manual is not an exhaustive list of the capabilities of this software.
 JabRef is a result of merger between BibKeeper and JBibtexManager.
\layout Standard

Additional Information is available at : http://jabref.sourceforge.net and
 in help\SpecialChar \menuseparator
Help content from the menu bar.
 
\layout Section

Introduction to BibTeX 
\layout Section

Installation
\layout Section

Features
\layout Subsection

Import
\layout Standard

Following formats are supported.
 
\layout Enumerate

Medline (XML) (also Fetch Medline)
\layout Enumerate

RIS
\layout Enumerate

Endnote
\layout Enumerate

Scifinder
\layout Standard

If you like other formats to be supported, please send an example file and
 put in a request at the sourceforge site.
\layout Subsection

Export
\layout Subsection

Editing
\layout Subsection

Grouping
\layout Subsection

Defining New Entry Types
\layout Subsection

Preamble and Strings
\layout Subsection

External Program
\layout Section

Customization
\layout Subsection

Table Display Content
\layout Subsection

Toolbar
\layout Subsection

Sidepanel
\layout Subsection

Appearance
\layout Enumerate

Fonts (see 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sub:How-do-install-fonts}

\end_inset 

 for instructions to install new fonts)
\layout Section

Keyboard Shortcuts
\layout Section

Limitations and Known Bugs
\layout Section

Future Additions
\layout Subsection

Shortcut customization
\layout Section

Feature Request and Bug Reports
\layout Section

Developing JabRef
\layout Section

Acknowledgements
\layout Section

FAQ
\layout Subsection

I don't know programing, is there any way I can contribute?
\layout Subsection


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{sub:How-do-install-fonts}

\end_inset 

How do install new fonts
\the_end
